140 wpm - 10 min - 1400 words max

Thanks and wrap-up

Hello everybody.

I'm going to offer all of you a self-referential sentence that announces my intentions for the next 10 minutes, then an attention-grabbing opening sentence, and then something really great, really huge, and really important that I want you to stick around for.

Welcome all
to the end
of the world.

You probably saw the announcements, mostly shared yesterday. 
We just bid farewell to the world where there are fewer than 400 ppm of CO2 in the atmosphere. 
That world is not coming back. Not in our lifetimes, or in the next generation. 

The world that our anscestors inhabited - at least in terms of its material characterization - is gone, for any practical purposes of policy or philosophy, forever. Yes, the mountains have known CO2 concentrations higher than 400ppm, but our species has not.

This is probably a very good time to figure out what exactly Aldo Leopold was talking with that whole "Thinking like a mountain" phrase. 

"Think like a mountain" has both power and urgency that can be utterly lost when stripped from context, much like the famous fragment - "eating is an agricultural act" - almost always taken out of context from a long and thoughtful passage by Wes' long-time collaborator Wendell Berry. 

We all have our favourite Berry quotes, but the one I like right now is one that doubles as self-referential satire: "I have never been by intention, a composer of bumper stickers.” For those of you who are live tweeting this conference, please, please tweet that. Because it fits into 140 characters, even with attribution to famous twitter user Wendell Berry and the #yalefood hashtag. And it would be really funny if you did.

Coming from FES' most celebrated alumni, "Think like a mountain" is a celebrated phrase in this place. I've seen it pop up on lacquered wood plaques placed for rapt contemplation by users of urinals, and in monochrome photocopied metaphors used for the acquisition of leadership skills in MODs. 

"Thinking like a mountain" is kind of like Berry's auto-destructing clickbait. If you think like a mountain, you situate yourself in context that is deeper than any human experience; longer than any human life. Let's prop up the phrase a bit with the short paragraph that surrounds it from, "A sand county almanac."

"I now suspect that just as a deer herd lives in mortal fear of its wolves, so does a mountain live in mortal fear of its deer. And perhaps with better cause, for while a buck pulled down by wolves can be replaced in two or three years, a range pulled down by too many deer may fail of replacement in as many decades. So also with cows. The cowman who cleans his range of wolves does not realize that he is taking over the wolf's job of trimming the herd to fit the range. He has not learned to think like a mountain. Hence we have dustbowls, and rivers washing the future into the sea."

What can we take from this? For every time we're asked in general terms to think holistically, or to employ systems thinking, and to imagine feedbacks and flows and emergy and exergy and footprints and unintended condequences, I think Leopold gives a sort of very useful practical example.

Leopold's cowman is practicing what today we might call "solutionism." The solution part sits in the middle of a 3-step sandwich. 

Step 1: Prioritze: Identify the single biggest problem with ranching: wolves eating cattle. 
Step 2: Solutionize: Identify the disruptive solution to the single biggest problem: eradicate the wolves. 
Step 3: Rationalize: Find a greater cause that gives you ethical license to pursue your disruptive solution. 

Here's one that almost always works in step 3: We've got to feed 9.1 billion people by 2050. Who can argue against that? Best to state it up front to give the impression that things happened in a different order.

Here's a great word-of-the-day: Monocausotaxophilia

This was coined as a bit of a joke etymological mashup by the German neuro-esthetician Ernst Pöppel [PE[r]-PL].

Monocausotaxophilia: the love of single causes that explain everything. 

In an analysis of poetic meter, Pöppel suggested that our cognitive processing was, among other thing, Procrustean, after the mythical greeek blacksmith Procrustes, who would habitually cut off his visitor's limbs in order that they might fit in his guest bed. The idea is that when faced with uncomfortable information or news, we cognitively cut off the bits that aren't consistent with our narrative, don't agree with our model, or won't fit inside the particular category or box we want them to fit into. 

Who are we at world's end? They say there are 100 types of people in the world: Those who understand binary, those who don't, those who already have heard me tell that joke this week for dog's sake, and those who think it's funny. For those of you in cateogry 10, let me try again. There are 2 types of people in the world: those who imagine that the word can be divided into 2 categories, and those who know insisting that your world fits into a grand binary is a ridiculous misanthropic failure of imagination and human potential.

Let me offer this, with apologies for the eerie similarity to stuff I said at Yale Food Systems Symposia past. In 2013, I said, if your line of questioning starts to get scary, you're probably on the right track. In 2014, I urged you to "keep food weird." In 2015, I suggested the exiting prospect of a food movement without great big ideas, great big books, great big men, and great big slogans. 

What if your ideas are too far-fetched? Impractical? Tried it before, didn't work, don't bother?

All of the material, energetic, and informational constituents of life have to pass through the razor-thin planetary membrane of soil and water that is our shared habitat. 

[cultural diversity]

 "The attention span of the people you write for is shorter than the length of one true sentence."

 # Questions for Sustainable Diets Panel
Brent Kim
Hugh Joseph
Ah-LOHN SHEEP-on

Brent:
The plural of beef is Beeves, which is a word I'm thankful for and we should all use as much as possible.
Why does the plant component appear to have such a minimal relative change in the isocaloric data?

Concern about what we might call protein regression. I'm thinking of Jennie Macdiarmid's agent-based simulations of the effect of carbon-taxed food, which pushed low-income people into cheap ultraprocessed carbs, leading to greater public health costs than found under the un-taxed meat regime.
The second one is an agroecological argument which was made by Christian Peters from Tufts - it's not as though all agricultural land has the same capability. As we shift from feed to food, how different are patterns of GHG production? Big concern about biodiveristy. Want 

Hugh: Here's an idea: can't measure what you can't manage, so should we take food systems off the table?



What about just taxing carbon?

Hugh:




